>> Omega is a place for people
to deal with the experience
of life.
>> Come home to themselves.
>> Seekers of all kinds.
>> A spiritual community.
>> A house with many rooms.
>> A ticket into spirituality.
>> Spirit of holistic education.
>> Kindred spirits.
>> A sense of what it would be
like to really be themselves.
>> Retreats have
always been important.
>> Learning environment.
>> Omega is a great gift.
>> You always go
into the desert.
>> Hundreds of
thousands of seekers.
>> Tool for unity.
>> You always retreat.
>> Refuge in the 21st century.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm a massage therapist
at the Omega Institute.
I'm also the director of
the Tibetan Relief Project,
and I'm a photographer
specializing
in photographs of Tibet.
My life has taken a
very long journey,
and I want to tell you the story
starting back in 1967, when
I was 11 years old.
At that time I went to India
with my parents and my two
sisters.
And India had a very
profound impact on me.
I was going to an Indian
school, and after school
all the other children
were going to dance class.
And I followed
them, and I started
studying dancing at that time.
And that became a passion
that is still with me today.
Being at Omega has
been incredible for me
because I work seasonally.
I work here for five
months, and then I
have the next seven months free.
And so I've been going to
Asia for the last 11 years
every winter.
And my first summer at
Omega, which was 1991,
was totally profound for me.
There was a Tibetan
musician here
who was teaching
meditation, and I met him.
And he gave me a book that
totally changed my life.
This book was "Freedom in Exile"
by His Holiness the Dalai Lama.
It's his autobiography,
and it also
shares what happened to him in
Tibet and why he left Tibet.
And I remember working in
the daytime doing massage,
and every night
running back to my tent
where I was living
to read his book.
At the end of the
summer, His Holiness
the Dalai Lama actually
came to New York
City for a big initiation called
the Kalachakra Initiation.
And I went to New York.
I was initiated by him.
And I felt yes, I've
really met my teacher.
At Madison Square
Garden there were many,
many papers out on tables about
how to help Tibetan people.
So I remember going through all
these brochures and thinking,
I've really got to
help some Tibetans.
And I picked up one
brochure and started
sponsoring somebody in India.
That went on until
1994, but in my heart,
I really personally wanted
to go to Dharamshala,
where the Dalai Lama
works and lives.
And so in 1994 I went to India.
And I first decided to go on
a retreat in Bodh Gaya, where
the Buddha actually
got enlightened.
I went on this
wonderful retreat.
After that I went
up to Dharamshala
and started to
photograph, trying
to capture the images that
moved me and that I felt
would move people back
in the United States.
I wanted to take these
images here and let
the images themselves speak
to the people about what
was happening in Tibet and
to the refugees in India.
My mother had given me
a small amount of money,
and she said, give this somebody
in Dharamshala who needs help.
And the whole time I was
there--I think I was there,
like, three months--
I kept waiting for
the right person,
not knowing who it would be,
but feeling I should wait.
A couple of days before
I left Dharamshala,
a student of mine--
I was teaching English--
he took out a photo, and he
said, this is a very sad story,
but it could be a
very happy story.
And I said, well,
what do you mean?
And he said this is
a really poor baby.
And I said, well,
bring me to the baby.
So he brought me to the
parents and the baby,
and I immediately fell
in love with the baby.
And I gave the donation
from my mother,
and that was the beginning
of the relief project.
I still know this little girl.
She's now seven years old
because our relief project
is that old.
And what happened is just as
I was leaving Dharamshala,
the parents gave me something
wrapped up in a newspaper.
And I was on a bus.
When I pulled out, I
looked in the newspaper,
and it was this beautiful
Tibetan dress called a chuba.
I was so moved by their
generosity towards me,
that the mother had given
me her very best dress.
And they were so poor.
She probably had, like, this
just one or two dresses.
And I told that
story to people here,
and donations
started to come in.
So the next year I was able to
return to India with much more
than just my mother's
money and started
to actually help people.
[SINGING]
The Tibetan Relief Project
has meant so much to me
because it's connected
me with being
able to help so many Tibetans.
And with so many wonderful
people in America,
I've made wonderful,
wonderful friends here
who year after year have
been supporting the project.
It's gotten me back
into dancing because one
of the recipients of the project
is a musician and a dancer.
And he asked me if I
would dance with him.
So lo and behold,
I'm dancing again.
These are the boots
that I dance with.
There actually has been a lot
of struggle with this story.
It hasn't been an easy unfolding
because of finances, mainly.
I've been doing massage
to support myself,
and then packing up
all the things I have,
leaving them at my parents',
going homeless overseas.
So I've struggled with almost
like a divided life, doing
something to support
myself, which
my heart wasn't totally in.
But I had to do it in order
to live the dream that I have
for the other part of the year.
People often ask me,
why do you love India?
Or why do you love Tibetans?
And I find it very difficult
to give a good explanation.
It's like my soul resonates
when I'm among Tibetan people.
I just feel like
I've come at home.
I think the spiritual
essence of life
being so important in India
and in the TIbertan culture.
I find that although there's
a growing movement in America
for spirituality, it's not
part of the everyday life.
And maybe it's that element that
has spoken to me so strongly
in Asia that means a lot.
>> I was born in Ghana
when it was still a colony.
My name, Kofi, means
Boy Born on Friday.
And my name, my middle
name, Amaniampong,
is the name of one of
our great ancestors.
And as is the custom
where I come from,
you do your best to name
people after honored people
in the past in
the hope that they
will replicate that and
bring that greatness out in
themselves.
Whether I have done
this or not I can't say,
but that's my name.
A very important
moment in my life,
I guess, that affected me
deeply, as you can see,
I'm an African.
And this is a strange world
because to some people
it makes no difference at
all, and to other people
it makes a great
deal of difference
that I am an African.
And I remember one
moment in particular.
I had grown up with my parents.
They had always loved
me and they had always
provided a home for me to
go to whenever I met trouble
in the world.
And up to a certain point, when
other people had said things
to me, shouted names at
me, all sorts of things
like that, that never
really bothered me
because I'd always been able
to go home to my parents.
But you grow.
I went to university.
I went through the things people
in my position so often do.
You would call up, you would
want to rent a room in a house.
They would say we
have rooms, they
would hear your
impeccable Oxford accent,
they would know you were the
kind of person they wanted.
You showed up five
minutes later.
Suddenly all rooms are gone.
So to solve that problem,
I just said to my friends,
I will cook.
Anybody finds me a place
to live, I'll cook.
So I got somewhere to live.
And a long time after that,
I wanted to get married.
And I had fallen in love.
She was a white girl,
but didn't matter to me.
Didn't seem to matter to her.
Then came the great day that
I went to meet her parents.
And suddenly the
color of my skin
made a great deal of difference
to my future mother-in-law.
And this was different
because this time I really
wanted something, and
my ability to get it
depended on somebody else
accepting that I was just
a simple, ordinary human being.
And there was
absolutely nothing I
could do to convince the
mother of the woman I
wanted to marry that I was
just an ordinary human being.
It made me shake my head
because what can you
do to get somebody to like you?
That's what I wanted.
I wanted to be loved and
I wanted to be liked.
What can you do to get
somebody to love you
when they have something against
you that is, in their eyes,
so reasonable?
I got long lectures
on how there were
going to be difficulties
in marrying a white person.
And especially they
said there were
going to be difficulties
in the children.
I was going to produce
half-colored children,
and they were going
to have problems.
Eventually the whole
thing made me so sad,
and I got more and more sad.
And then one day I looked up
and I thought, I have a mother.
I have a family.
I have people who do love me.
And I went home and
I saw my mother,
and she said, one day you
will put all this behind you.
And I said, no, no, no.
I said, nobody will
ever love me again.
And to cut a long story short,
I did put all of this behind me,
and my mother was quite correct.
Six months later I met someone
else, and we got married.
And I'm very content.
And the strange thing is,
I married a different woman
and she was white.
And we produced
half-colored children.
And if they are having
troubles in life,
they keep it very, very
well hidden from me.
Are we happy?
We're happy.
Bye.
But I've never
forgotten that day,
the day I had to
cope with the fact
that I had to discover
for myself that I was
a real human being and that
there were people out there who
did love me, and that the most
important person who loved me
was God working through myself,
and myself working through God.
So although it was a
very painful experience,
in many ways I'm grateful to
it because I've never forgotten
ever since that no matter what
anyone says to me or does to me
or thinks about me, I
am a real human being.
The universe invited me here.
And I have as much right
to be here as anybody
else and as much right
to my contentment
and happiness as anybody else.
So I'm now grateful
to that woman
who thought I was not good
enough to marry her daughter.
I'm a real human being, and
that is what I learned from her.
And so I am now very
grateful indeed to her
because I do not
know any other way
I would have
learned that lesson.
Try not to look so grouchy.
I've told my children
the same thing,
but whether they've
learned it or not,
they will have to have
a crisis of their own
and then try and
remember where to go.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I work here at
the Omega Institute.
I first visited Omega
about 16 years ago
and have only been working
here the last year and a half.
Sort of a cycle came
all around for me.
The first time I
was here was right
after I'd had a near-death
experience which
transformed my life.
And now my life has
completely unfolded
into one of being solidly
focused on spiritual path
and spiritual work.
But 16 years ago,
I was completely
at the end of my rope.
After being estranged
from my family,
struggling with dyslexia, which
was undiagnosed at the time,
trying to make it in New York
in theater at a very naive age.
Finding a woman who I fell
absolutely in love with,
I managed to find myself sailing
with her to the Virgin Islands.
We wound up in a hurricane in
the middle of the open ocean,
lost at sea for over a month.
The relationship
fell apart, then,
when we finally did
make it to land.
And at the end of all that I
just couldn't take it anymore,
and I became suicidal.
Actually, I think suicide
was something that was always
on the back burner for me.
The question of am
I really supposed
to be here in this life?
Why is the hand that's dealt
me the one that I'm receiving?
It just didn't seem to add up.
So I reached a point
where I finally,
after struggling,
being disillusioned
with the psychological
community,
I took matters
into my own hands.
Going into the
Atlantic City surf
on a winter's day, deserted
beach, with enough sleeping
pills and prescription
anti-anxiety drug
to kill me alone.
I swam out as far as
I could out into the
shore until finally I
was out of strength,
couldn't move my muscles.
The cold water, the drugs.
And the last thing I saw was
a little boat on the horizon
as I went unconscious
and went under the water.
Well, I was quite amazed to
find myself then awake again,
this time under my body, which
was now hanging lifelessly
in the water.
I floated up past it
with strange disinterest.
But simply seeing it,
not necessarily saying,
oh, there I am, because I was
amazed to find that I was now
outside of that body.
And the I that is
me was with me.
And what I saw hanging in
the water, the end of all
this trauma and drama,
was just a shell.
I floated up into the sky.
There was low
overhanging clouds.
And I turned and
looked back down
to see this boat was now
searching frantically to try
to find me under the water.
I looked at that again with
disinterested observation,
but no attachment, turned
my perspective outward.
And as if something
from my chest
pulled me at amazing speeds like
a fly fisherman pulling back
his line, I was just
wished out into space.
I was hurled into
space until finally I
was at the foot of these
shimmering translucent robes
in a whole other
dimension, looking upward
into the gaze of this wise
Native American shaman who
gave me a real stern talking
to for having taken my life,
assured me that there was
a mission and a purpose
to my life, that I needed to
wake up to remembering it,
that I needed to get on it
and move forward with it,
that it wasn't just about me.
There were many other
people interconnected
with this mission.
And from there he led
me into a black void
where there was a sphere of
white rapidly approaching.
It enveloped me.
I found myself suspended in the
center of this orb of light.
There was the vision
of aspect of my life,
not just my past and present and
future, but the impact my life
had on everybody
I interacted with.
From this place of
seeing all this,
my body, meanwhile,
was being infused
with the most profound
love, forgiveness, healing.
And from there it was as if I
was launched out into the God's
own internet, if you will.
From there I was resuscitated.
Meanwhile, I'd been
pulled out of the water.
I was being given
mouth to mouth.
I was coughing up water, and
boom, I'm back in my body,
but forever changed.
Immediately after the
near-death experience,
for about three days, there
was this profound awareness
within my body that I was
a soul inhabiting my body.
But after about three
days that faded,
and I became normal again.
So it took me a long
time to fully integrate.
And there was times
when I wondered
had I ever been changed?
Was this really real?
But there was a simple guiding
principle that the voice of God
had spoken so
clearly to me, which
was an answer to a prayer
I'd had as a child,
wanting to change the
world as so many of us do,
wanting to be of
service to the world.
And the message was simple.
If you want to heal the world,
first connect to yourself.
Really know yourself.
And that's a big job.
By connecting to yourself you
bring healing to yourself.
From there you connect
to your family.
I had estranged
myself from my family.
So I returned to my family
to make those connections.
From there, connect
to the community.
I wasn't part of any community.
I was anonymous
in New York City.
So I returned to my
hometown, my family,
doing work in the community,
real service work.
And from there, you can
then make a connection
with your nation,
and from there you
can affect healing the world.
But ultimately it's a spiral
that goes around and around
and always returns you to a
deeper level of connecting
to yourself, knowing yourself.
So I came to know
myself fairly well,
got very involved in
my family and witnessed
some amazing transformations
within my family dynamics.
I became very involved in
unity work in my community.
And then the call came, the
realization that the time was
now to walk across the country.
That was my connecting
to the nation.
I walked from Ocean City,
Maryland to San Francisco,
California across Route 50
as a statement for unity,
as a testimony to the oneness
that is true between all of us.
There is an
interconnectedness that
was so apparent in my
near-death experience that
can be seen if only you look.
It's right there.
It's the amazing grace
that the song sings about.
It's the recognition
that we are all one,
and we're in this together.
But at the end of
all that, I was
left feeling more deeply
aware of levels within myself
that I was not yet aware of.
Healing the world starts
with healing yourself.
This unity consciousness
is something that
has to be held within first.
The message that love your
brother as you love yourself,
or love others as
you love yourself,
you have to ask yourself,
do you love yourself?
Because many of us do,
in fact, love others
as we love ourselves.
The truth is we
loathe ourselves.
So this simple process,
being able to lift myself up
from the despair and the
confusions of any given moment
back to that larger
picture perspective
from the near-death
experience, combined
with this simple guidance of
connecting again and again,
is what has sustained
me and moved me forward
for the last 16 years.
[MUSIC PLAYING]